# Multimedia

## General multimedia handling

Multimedia metadata is stored in couch, using `CommCareMultimedia` and its subclasses: `CommCareImage`, `CommCareAudio`, etc.

Each file is stored once, regardless of how many applications or domains use it. This is enforced via the [by_hash](https://github.com/dimagi/commcare-hq/blob/master/corehq/apps/hqmedia/_design/views/by_hash/map.js) view, which stores a hash of each multimedia file's content. When new multimedia is uploaded, the contents are hashed and looked up to determine wheether or not to create a new document. See `CommCareMultimedia.get_by_data` and its calling code in places like `BaseProcessFileUploadView.process_upload`.

These documents are never deleted.

## Multimedia in applications

### The app's multimedia_map

The biggest use case for multimedia in CommCare is displaying multimedia in applications. The application's `multimedia_map` property stores information about where it uses multimedia.

`multimedia_map` is a dict where each key is a path and each value is a dict corresponding to an `HQMediaMapItem`. The map has one entry for every path, also called a **reference**, in the application. If an application uses the same image as an icon for two forms, it will have two entries in the map, *unless* a user has edited the app so that both forms use the same path.

Sample multimedia_map entry:

```
"jr://file/commcare/image/module0_en.jpg": {
    "doc_type": "HQMediaMapItem",
    "media_type": "CommCareImage",
    "multimedia_id": "7f14f2dc29fa7c406dc1b0d40603e742",
    "unique_id": "b6ee70e5e61ea550b26d36cc185dde23",
    "version": 17
}
```

The **path** is auto-generated by HQ based on where the file is being used. It can be manually edited - everywhere that a multimedia file can be uploaded, its path can be edited. There is also a tool to edit multimedia paths in bulk via Excel.

The **doc_type** is always `HQMediaMapItem`.

The **media_type** is `CommCareMultimedia` or one of its subclasses.

The **multimedia_id** is the id of the corresponding `CommCareMultimedia` document.

The **unique_id** is a hash of the concatenated multimedia id and path. That means this id will be unique within the multimedia map, but will not be globally unique.

The **version** is the app version where the multimedia was added or most recently changed. More on this below.

#### Versioning multimedia

CommCare (on mobile) uses the version to determine when to re-download an updated multimedia file.  The version will always be an app version. This correspondence isn't necessary; all the phone checks is if the current version is greater than the version already on the phone - if so, the phone will re-download the multimedia. This logic is based on the logic used to download updated forms.

The version is updated (set to the latest app version) in the following situations:
- Multimedia is added to the app.
- The content of multimedia is changed, by using the "Replace" button in the uploader. This also causes the multimedia id to change.
- The path alone is changed using the "Manage Multimedia Paths" bulk uploader. This does not change the unique id, even though the path changes.
- The path and content are changed together in the UI. This also replaces the multimedia id and re-generates the unique id.


### media_suite.xml

The media suite contains a list of `media` elements, one for each value in the multimedia map.

```
<media path="../../commcare/image">
    <resource descriptor="Image File: FILENAME" id="media-UNIQUE_ID-FILENAME" version="VERSION">
        <location authority="local">PATH</location>
        <location authority="remote">
            URL
        </location>
    </resource>
</media>
```

- FILENAME is originally generated by HQ and will be fairly readable, something like `module0_en.jpg`, and may be modified by users.
- PATH will be the path to the file on the device, so similar to the path used as a key in the multimedia map, though in a format like `./commcare/image/module0_en.jpg` rather than the `jr://commcare/image/module0_en.jpg` format used in the map.
- UNIQUE_ID and VERSION are from the multimedia map.
- URL is the url to access the file on the server and incorporates the media type, multimedia id, and filename, e.g., `http://www.commcarehq.org/hq/multimedia/file/CommCareImage/7f14f2dc29fa7c406dc1b0d40603e742/module0_en.jpg`.

If the same file is uploaded to two different paths, it will be included twice on the device, but on the server it will be stored only once and will have only one `CommCareMultimedia` document. Although there will be two different URLs in the media suite, they will point to the same page: HQ only uses the multimedia id to identify the file, it ignores the URL's filename suffix.
